CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
In which we try to explain why we consider artificial intelligence to be a subject most
worthy of study, and in which we try to decide what exactly it is, this being a good thing to
decide before embarking.
We call ourselves Homo sapiens—man the wise—because our intelligence is so important Intelligence
to us. For thousands of years, we have tried to understand how we think and act—that is,
how our brain, a mere handful of matter, can perceive, understand, predict, and manipulate a
world far larger and more complicated than itself. The field of artificial intelligence, or AI, Artificial intelligence
is concerned with not just understanding but also building intelligent entities—machines that
can compute how to act effectively and safely in a wide variety of novel situations.
Surveys regularly rank AI as one of the most interesting and fastest-growing fields, and it
is already generating over a trillion dollars a year in revenue. AI expert Kai-Fu Lee predicts
that its impact will be “more than anything in the history of mankind.” Moreover, the intellectual frontiers of AI are wide open. Whereas a student of an older science such as physics
might feel that the best ideas have already been discovered by Galileo, Newton, Curie, Einstein, and the rest, AI still has many openings for full-time masterminds.
AI currently encompasses a huge variety of subfields, ranging from the general (learning,
reasoning, perception, and so on) to the specific, such as playing chess, proving mathematical theorems, writing poetry, driving a car, or diagnosing diseases. AI is relevant to any
intellectual task; it is truly a universal field.
1.1 What Is AI?
We have claimed that AI is interesting, but we have not said what it is. Historically, researchers have pursued several different versions of AI. Some have defined intelligence in
terms of fidelity to human performance, while others prefer an abstract, formal definition of
intelligence called rationality—loosely speaking, doing the “right thing.” The subject matter Rationality
itself also varies: some consider intelligence to be a property of internal thought processes
and reasoning, while others focus on intelligent behavior, an external characterization.1
From these two dimensions—human vs. rational2
and thought vs. behavior—there are
four possible combinations, and there have been adherents and research programs for all
1 In the public eye, there is sometimes confusion between the terms “artificial intelligence” and “machine learning.” Machine learning is a subfield of AI that studies the ability to improve performance based on experience.
Some AI systems use machine learning methods to achieve competence, but some do not.
2 We are not suggesting that humans are “irrational” in the dictionary sense of “deprived of normal mental
clarity.” We are merely conceding that human decisions are not always mathematically perfect.
2 Chapter 1 Introduction
four. The methods used are necessarily different: the pursuit of human-like intelligence must
be in part an empirical science related to psychology, involving observations and hypotheses
about actual human behavior and thought processes; a rationalist approach, on the other hand,
involves a combination of mathematics and engineering, and connects to statistics, control
theory, and economics. The various groups have both disparaged and helped each other. Let
us look at the four approaches in more detail.
1.1.1 Acting humanly: The Turing test approach
Turing test The Turing test, proposed by Alan Turing (1950), was designed as a thought experiment that
would sidestep the philosophical vagueness of the question “Can a machine think?” A computer passes the test if a human interrogator, after posing some written questions, cannot tell
whether the written responses come from a person or from a computer. Chapter 27 discusses
the details of the test and whether a computer would really be intelligent if it passed. For
now, we note that programming a computer to pass a rigorously applied test provides plenty
to work on. The computer would need the following capabilities:
• natural language processing to communicate successfully in a human language; Natural language
processing
Knowledge • knowledge representation to store what it knows or hears; representation
Automated • automated reasoning to answer questions and to draw new conclusions;
reasoning
• machine learning to adapt to new circumstances and to detect and extrapolate patterns. Machine learning
Turing viewed the physical simulation of a person as unnecessary to demonstrate intelligence.
Total Turing test However, other researchers have proposed a total Turing test, which requires interaction with
objects and people in the real world. To pass the total Turing test, a robot will need
Computer vision • computer vision and speech recognition to perceive the world;
Robotics • robotics to manipulate objects and move about.
These six disciplines compose most of AI. Yet AI researchers have devoted little effort to
passing the Turing test, believing that it is more important to study the underlying principles of intelligence. The quest for “artificial flight” succeeded when engineers and inventors
stopped imitating birds and started using wind tunnels and learning about aerodynamics.
Aeronautical engineering texts do not define the goal of their field as making “machines that
fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool even other pigeons.”
1.1.2 Thinking humanly: The cognitive modeling approach
To say that a program thinks like a human, we must know how humans think. We can learn
about human thought in three ways:
Introspection • introspection—trying to catch our own thoughts as they go by;
• psychological experiments—observing a person in action; Psychological
experiment
Brain imaging • brain imaging—observing the brain in action.
Once we have a sufficiently precise theory of the mind, it becomes possible to express the
theory as a computer program. If the program’s input–output behavior matches corresponding human behavior, that is evidence that some of the program’s mechanisms could also be
operating in humans.
For example, Allen Newell and Herbert Simon, who developed GPS, the “General Problem Solver” (Newell and Simon, 1961), were not content merely to have their program solve
Section 1.1 What Is AI? 3
problems correctly. They were more concerned with comparing the sequence and timing of
its reasoning steps to those of human subjects solving the same problems. The interdisciplinary field of cognitive science brings together computer models from AI and experimental Cognitive science
techniques from psychology to construct precise and testable theories of the human mind.
Cognitive science is a fascinating field in itself, worthy of several textbooks and at least
one encyclopedia (Wilson and Keil, 1999). We will occasionally comment on similarities or
differences between AI techniques and human cognition. Real cognitive science, however, is
necessarily based on experimental investigation of actual humans or animals. We will leave
that for other books, as we assume the reader has only a computer for experimentation.
In the early days of AI there was often confusion between the approaches. An author
would argue that an algorithm performs well on a task and that it is therefore a good model
of human performance, or vice versa. Modern authors separate the two kinds of claims; this
distinction has allowed both AI and cognitive science to develop more rapidly. The two fields
fertilize each other, most notably in computer vision, which incorporates neurophysiological
evidence into computational models. Recently, the combination of neuroimaging methods
combined with machine learning techniques for analyzing such data has led to the beginnings
of a capability to “read minds”—that is, to ascertain the semantic content of a person’s inner
thoughts. This capability could, in turn, shed further light on how human cognition works.
1.1.3 Thinking rationally: The “laws of thought” approach
The Greek philosopher Aristotle was one of the first to attempt to codify “right thinking”—
that is, irrefutable reasoning processes. His syllogisms provided patterns for argument struc- Syllogism
tures that always yielded correct conclusions when given correct premises. The canonical
example starts with Socrates is a man and all men are mortal and concludes that Socrates is
mortal. (This example is probably due to Sextus Empiricus rather than Aristotle.) These laws
of thought were supposed to govern the operation of the mind; their study initiated the field
called logic.
Logicians in the 19th century developed a precise notation for statements about objects
in the world and the relations among them. (Contrast this with ordinary arithmetic notation,
which provides only for statements about numbers.) By 1965, programs could, in principle,
solve any solvable problem described in logical notation. The so-called logicist tradition Logicist
within artificial intelligence hopes to build on such programs to create intelligent systems.
Logic as conventionally understood requires knowledge of the world that is certain—
a condition that, in reality, is seldom achieved. We simply don’t know the rules of, say,
politics or warfare in the same way that we know the rules of chess or arithmetic. The theory
of probability fills this gap, allowing rigorous reasoning with uncertain information. In Probability
principle, it allows the construction of a comprehensive model of rational thought, leading
from raw perceptual information to an understanding of how the world works to predictions
about the future. What it does not do, is generate intelligent behavior. For that, we need a
theory of rational action. Rational thought, by itself, is not enough.
1.1.4 Acting rationally: The rational agent approach
An agent is just something that acts (agent comes from the Latin agere, to do). Of course, Agent
all computer programs do something, but computer agents are expected to do more: operate
autonomously, perceive their environment, persist over a prolonged time period, adapt to
4 Chapter 1 Introduction
Rational agent change, and create and pursue goals. A rational agent is one that acts so as to achieve the
best outcome or, when there is uncertainty, the best expected outcome.
In the “laws of thought” approach to AI, the emphasis was on correct inferences. Making correct inferences is sometimes part of being a rational agent, because one way to act
rationally is to deduce that a given action is best and then to act on that conclusion. On the
other hand, there are ways of acting rationally that cannot be said to involve inference. For
example, recoiling from a hot stove is a reflex action that is usually more successful than a
slower action taken after careful deliberation.
All the skills needed for the Turing test also allow an agent to act rationally. Knowledge
representation and reasoning enable agents to reach good decisions. We need to be able to
generate comprehensible sentences in natural language to get by in a complex society. We
need learning not only for erudition, but also because it improves our ability to generate
effective behavior, especially in circumstances that are new.
The rational-agent approach to AI has two advantages over the other approaches. First, it
is more general than the “laws of thought” approach because correct inference is just one of
several possible mechanisms for achieving rationality. Second, it is more amenable to scientific development. The standard of rationality is mathematically well defined and completely
general. We can often work back from this specification to derive agent designs that provably
achieve it—something that is largely impossible if the goal is to imitate human behavior or
thought processes.
For these reasons, the rational-agent approach to AI has prevailed throughout most of
the field’s history. In the early decades, rational agents were built on logical foundations
and formed definite plans to achieve specific goals. Later, methods based on probability
theory and machine learning allowed the creation of agents that could make decisions under
◮ uncertainty to attain the best expected outcome. In a nutshell, AI has focused on the study
Do the right thing and construction of agents that do the right thing. What counts as the right thing is defined
by the objective that we provide to the agent. This general paradigm is so pervasive that we
Standard model might call it the standard model. It prevails not only in AI, but also in control theory, where a
controller minimizes a cost function; in operations research, where a policy maximizes a sum
of rewards; in statistics, where a decision rule minimizes a loss function; and in economics,
where a decision maker maximizes utility or some measure of social welfare.
We need to make one important refinement to the standard model to account for the fact
that perfect rationality—always taking the exactly optimal action—is not feasible in complex
environments. The computational demands are just too high. Chapters 5 and 17 deal with the
Limited rationality issue of limited rationality—acting appropriately when there is not enough time to do all
the computations one might like. However, perfect rationality often remains a good starting
point for theoretical analysis.
1.1.5 Beneficial machines
The standard model has been a useful guide for AI research since its inception, but it is
probably not the right model in the long run. The reason is that the standard model assumes
that we will supply a fully specified objective to the machine.
For an artificially defined task such as chess or shortest-path computation, the task comes
with an objective built in—so the standard model is applicable. As we move into the real
world, however, it becomes more and more difficult to specify the objective completely and
Section 1.2 The Foundations of Artificial Intelligence 5
correctly. For example, in designing a self-driving car, one might think that the objective is
to reach the destination safely. But driving along any road incurs a risk of injury due to other
errant drivers, equipment failure, and so on; thus, a strict goal of safety requires staying in the
garage. There is a tradeoff between making progress towards the destination and incurring a
risk of injury. How should this tradeoff be made? Furthermore, to what extent can we allow
the car to take actions that would annoy other drivers? How much should the car moderate
its acceleration, steering, and braking to avoid shaking up the passenger? These kinds of
questions are difficult to answer a priori. They are particularly problematic in the general
area of human–robot interaction, of which the self-driving car is one example.
The problem of achieving agreement between our true preferences and the objective we
put into the machine is called the value alignment problem: the values or objectives put into Value alignment
problem
the machine must be aligned with those of the human. If we are developing an AI system in
the lab or in a simulator—as has been the case for most of the field’s history—there is an easy
fix for an incorrectly specified objective: reset the system, fix the objective, and try again.
As the field progresses towards increasingly capable intelligent systems that are deployed
in the real world, this approach is no longer viable. A system deployed with an incorrect
objective will have negative consequences. Moreover, the more intelligent the system, the
more negative the consequences.
Returning to the apparently unproblematic example of chess, consider what happens if
the machine is intelligent enough to reason and act beyond the confines of the chessboard.
In that case, it might attempt to increase its chances of winning by such ruses as hypnotizing or blackmailing its opponent or bribing the audience to make rustling noises during its
opponent’s thinking time.3
It might also attempt to hijack additional computing power for
itself.
of defining winning as the
These behaviors are not “unintelligent” or “insane”; they are a logical consequence
sole objective for the machine.
It is impossible to anticipate all the ways in which a machine pursuing a fixed objective
might misbehave. There is good reason, then, to think that the standard model is inadequate.
We don’t want machines that are intelligent in the sense of pursuing their objectives; we want
them to pursue our objectives. If we cannot transfer those objectives perfectly to the machine,
then we need a new formulation—one in which the machine is pursuing our objectives, but
is necessarily uncertain as to what they are. When a machine knows that it doesn’t know the
complete objective, it has an incentive to act cautiously, to ask permission, to learn more about
our preferences through observation, and to defer to human control. Ultimately, we want
agents that are provably beneficial to humans. We will return to this topic in Section 1.5. 